Introduction
Globally, developing human resources in an organization is a priority. Human resources development offers the employees the ability to handle a variety of assignments in the workplace. Apart from the individual benefits, human resources development enhances the ability of an organization to compete and adapt to a changing competitive environment. In other to meet the goal of sustained competitive advantage, organizations over the years have designed a human resources development technique in which managers play the role of mentors to less experienced employees in the workplace.
Managers as mentors in an organization entail a process in which managers establish a relationship between them and individuals in the first stages of their careers. Mentoring is more or less a learning relationship in which the managers share technical information, institutional knowledge and insights with employees. Informal mentoring relationship may develop in an organization in which a manager takes a new junior and less experienced employee ‘under his or her wing’. Formal mentoring programme allow organizations to create and nurture those relationships by matching managers with less experienced employees to meet specific organizational goals while at the same time helping those in mentoring relationship to identify and develop their own talent.
Formal mentoring relationship is dynamic and unique but differs substantially between organizations. The difference is to a very large extent determined by what the organization produces or service rendered. For instances a mentoring programme designed to enhance the recruitment and retention of a mechanical engineer is bound to look different from one intended to improve the quality of a psychiatric nurse. However, there are some basic elements that should be incorporated into every mentoring programme. Apart from those basic elements, the function of mentoring is similar and of similar importance to organizations in which a mentoring relationship is formally introduced. It is these basic elements and the functions of mentoring among others that constitute the main thrust of this discourse.

Mentor andMentoring: AConceptualClarification
Mentor as a concept has its traditional origin from the Greek mythology. According to legend, Mentor was a figure in Homer’s Odyssey. Mentor was the name of a wise and trusted counselor to whom Odysseus (also known as Ulysses) entrusted the care, tutoring and protection of his son, Telemachus while he Odysseus embarked on his famous wanderings. It was these wanderings that took him to the Trojan wars and other places that the word ‘odyssey’ in our present day usage drives its meaning. The Greek archetype had it that, Athena the Greek goddess of wisdom did. assume Mentor’s form for the purpose of guiding, teaching counseling and protecting the young Telemachus.
This archetype offers provocative insights into the meaning of mentor as transcending gender and patriarchal understandings. In ordinary usage, the term mentor typically was used by the recipients of the counsel, teaching, protection etc to refer to the person providing them. Observers of such counseling and tutoring have also been known to label certain persons as mentors. This labeling becomes obvious in a situation in which an older influential person takes a younger person with potentials ‘under his wing’ so to speak, for the purpose of protecting, counseling and tutoring. While the person providing the services is known as a mentor, the younger person that is befitting from the relationship is known as a protégé or mentee.
From the term Mentor, the concept of mentoring is derived. Mentoring refers to the patterned behavior or process whereby a person acts.as a mentor to a protégé or mentee who enjoys protection, counseling and tutoring from the mentor. The Greek mythological and historical context of mentor and mentoring portrays the concepts as informal, unofficial, voluntary, mutually agreeable and self selected interaction between the mentor and the mentee. It should be noted that while the roots of mentor and mentoring is traced to mythology, mentoring is no myth. It is a very real relationship that has been an integral part of social life.
From the traditional manifestation of informal mentor and mentoring, the process has become a programme that has gained momentum in the. management and human resource development literature. Mentoring has become an institutionalized strategy that generally refers to a. situation in an organization in which a relationship exists between a less experienced individual known as the mentee or protégé and a more experienced individual known as the mentor (Kram 1985). The traditional mentoring model is viewed as a dyadic face-to-face long term relationship between a mentor and a mentee. However, the structure of modem mentoring can be a network of multiple mentors (Burlew 1991, Bird and Didon 1992).
Formal mentoring relationship involves assigned pairings of mentor with their mentees or protégés. This is not the case with informal mentoring relationships. Its development is necessitated by mutual identification and interpersonal comfort (Ragins 2002). Formal mentoring programmes match individuals as part of a development process and the individuals must then strive to get to know one another. Formal mentoring relationships are part of an organized, facilitated development programme for a specified duration in which mentees are generally prompted to have developmental goals in mind. It is within these developmental goals that formal mentoring must initiate interaction and establish rapport (Gaskil 1993).

Managers as Mentors in FormalOrganisations
In an organization, mentoring relationships exists between managers especially at mid points of their careers and other employees in the first stages of their careers. In this relationship, the managers as mentors aid the mentees by impacting technical, interpersonal, political skills and other aspects of knowledge on the mentee. As mentors, the managers play a versatile role in this relationship (Zelditch 1990). It is a relationship designed in such a way that the managers provide personal and professional supports to the mentees. The managers, who are always more experienced than the mentees, make use of their experience in a facilitative way to support the development of the mentees (Hymowitz 1995, Baugh & Scandura 1999).
In other for the manager as a mentor to effectively and successfully share technical information, institutional knowledge and insight with the mentee in an organization, the manager must possess certain qualities. It is worthwhile to note that the attributes of the manager as mentor encompasses both personal and professional qualities. See figure 1:1 below. With these qualities in place, he is able to help the mentee identify with his. organization and professional environment, maintain confidentiality and ensure that communications are clear, open and reciprocal.

A combination of the personal and professional qualities of the manager as a mentor is subsumed into three mentoring dispositions which are essential to effective mentoring. The mentoring dispositions are:
Firstly, the manager as mentor must be prepared to open his or her self to the mentees by sharing their reasons and decision processes with them and allowing themselves to be observed.
Secondly, the manager has the skills and abilities to match the support they give with the mentee’s developing knowledge and understanding, thereby leading incrementally;
Thirdly, the manager as a mentor should be able to express care and concern. He should also be able to demonstrate empathy for the mentee’s situation.
It is should be noted that the effectiveness of the mentoring relationship is not only dependent on the qualities and the role of the manager, but also on the qualities and role of the mentee. The mentee among other qualities must have genuine interest in personal growth and professional development. He must have strong potentials and commitment to learning and acquiring new skills and be willing to take risk as part of the learning process. The role of mentee must incorporate among others, the ability to develop mutually agreeable goals for the mentoring relationship that are specific, measureable, achievable, realistic and timely.

Phases in Mentoring
Managers in an organization used the mentoring relationship to assist employees at specific stages of development or transition and lasts for a sustained but defined period of time. Inmost cases, the mentoring period is in four phases namely: initiation, cultivation, separation and redefinition phases. (Kram, 1983). The mentoring relationship is not only facilitative, supportive and developmental but also offers the managers some level of benefits. In other words, the mentoring relationship provides developmental opportunity for both parties and can thus be of mutual benefits (Koonce 1994).
• Initiation Phase: The first phase of the mentoring relationship is known as the phase of initiation. The initiation period is between 6-12 months. It is in this stage that the employee admires the manager’s competence. The mentee also in this stage recognizes the manager (mentor) as his or her source of support and guidance. The manager on the other hand, identifies and realizes that the employee is someone with potentials and as such can be mentored. This stage is crucial to the mentoring relationship between the manager and the employee. It is this phase that determines the success of the mentoring.
• Cultivation Phase: Upon the identification and realization of the potentials of the mentee, the manager proceeds to the cultivation phase. The cultivation stage takes about 2-5 years. It is a stage when the actual mentoring takes place. The manager provides challenging work and assignments. It is also at this stage too that the manager ensures that mentee is protected and he provides sponsorship. in this second phase, the mentee gains self confidence, new attitudes, values and styles of operation.
• Separation Phase: The phase spans between 6-12 months. In this stage, the manager as a mentor demonstrates his success at developing management talent as he move apart from the mentee. Another fundamental feature of the separation phase is that the employee begins to experience independence and autonomy and at times he experiences feelings of turmoil, anxiety and loss of time. It should be noted that the feelings do not bring about any form of regret on the part of the mentee.
• Redefinition Phase: This is the last phase and, it has no definite time span. The mentoring relationship is on till the manager leaves the job either by change ofjob, retirement or death. This is why this stage is also referred to as ongoing stage. In this phase, the manager continues to be supportive, takes pride in the accomplishments of the mentee. The mentee on his or her part responds with gratitude for what he or she has gained from the mentoring relationship over the years. One basic characteristics of this phase is that the mentoring relationship in most cases, inevitably give way and the relationship becomes that of friendship and true professional colleagues.

The Benefits ofMentoring to the Mentee and the Manager
In a formal mentoring relationship, mentoring provides two fundamental functions. The functions are career functions and the psychosocial functions. The career functions cut across a range of behaviours’ that help the mentee to learn the ropes and prepare the mentee for hierarchical advancement within an organization. This advancement is achieved through coaching the mentee, sponsoring, increasing his or her positive exposure and viability and offering them protection and challenging assignments (Bazionelos 2004).
The career function is highly dependent on the manager’s position and influence in the organization. In most cases, the career functions are a stronger predictor of the mentee compensation and advancement. A Meta Analysis conducted by Allen et al (2004) shows that mentored individuals have more protection receive more promotion and earn higher salaries than their non mentored counterpart. In addition to these instrumental outcomes, mentees report more career satisfaction, career commitment, job satisfaction and greater expectations for advancement than those that are not in any form of mentoring relationships (Scandura 1992).
The psychosocial functions of mentoring are more personal than professional. This mentoring function relies on an emotional bond between the manager (mentor) and the junior and less experienced employee (mentee). Psychosocial functions are built on trust, intimacy and interpersonal bonds in the relationship and sometimes include behaviours that can enhance the identity, self worth and self efficacy of the mentee. The mentee also derive psychosocial functions such as offering acceptance, confirmation and providing counseling, friendship and role modeling (Wanberg et al 2006).
The mentoring functions are not restricted to the mentee only, the mentor also have some kind of benefit. The mentoring relationship offers the manager improved job performance, career success and revitalization, recognition by others, a loyal base of support from the mentee and a sense of personal fulfillment and satisfaction (Noe 1988, Mullen & Noe 1999). It also offers the manager the opportunity and exposure to new ideas, technologies and perspectives through development of new professional and organizational contacts.
It should be noted however that similar to the rising star effect, the benefits associated with being a mentor may be a function of pre existing differences between managers who chose to be mentors and non mentors. Managers who chose to become mentors are high performing established stars who already experience high level of career success as well as positive job and career attitude. Furthermore, high performing managers may be drawn to organizations that offer climates and assignments that lead to positive career outcomes (Ragins & Verbos 2007).
It is worthy to mention that the benefits that accrue to the manager as a mentor and his mentee is influenced largely by the characteristics of those in the mentoring relationship and organizational support. This happens through three mechanism-selection, evocation and manipulation. Selection refers to who the manager selects as a mentee. Evocation has to do with the responses that are evoked from others, while manipulation reflects how individual shape in the course of their mentoring relationship (Ragins & Scandura 1999).
Since the onus of selection (matching a mentor and a mentee) in most formal mentoring relationship lies with the organization, two personality characteristics of pro-activity and
openness to experience are fundamental. The mechanisms of evocation and manipulation of interactions within a formal mentoring context is dependent on the personality characteristics. The pro-activity of the mentee purportedly affects the amount of mentoring. Through initiation and maintenance of scheduled meetings between the mentor and mentee in terms of evocation and through goal-oriented behavior during mentor interactions are achieved.
Openness to experience has to do with imagination, intelligence, originality and open mindedness. It is a very crucial factor that determines the level of outcome in both career and psychosocial functioning. Through evocation and manipulations, the mentee with higher openness to experience are more inquisitive and receptive to new ideas and perspectives from a manager (mentor) that the mentee may not have gravitated to on their own accord. High openness to experience is similarly predispose managers to be more willing to mentor a mentee that is not a mirror reflection of themselves and also have the openness to evoke more comfortable atmosphere for self disclosure (Coley 1996).

Conclusion
The discourse sufficiently reveals that a mentoring relationship exist between managers and employees in the first stage of their career. This relationship is different from every other form of relationship in the workplace. What distinguishes it from other forms of personal relationship is that a mentoring relationship is a developmental relationship that is embedded within the career context. It is a relationship that is focused on the development process that allows the organizations to create and nurture the relationship between the manager and less experienced employee to meet specific organizational objectives while helping the mentee to identify and develop its own talents.
The monitoring relationship between the manager and the less experienced employee, no doubt, is of immerse mutual benefits to the mentee and the manager. Apart from the mutual benefits, the organization in which the mentoring relationship is anchored has some benefits too. It serves as methods of deliberate and systematic knowledge transfer. It also provides a forum for providing job specific knowledge and insight for those positions requiring experience, judgement, discretion and soft skills in order to be effectively achieved.
The level of benefits that accrue to the mentee and the organization is not dependent on the qualities and role of the manager only but also on the organization in which the mentoring relationship is taking place. In other to achieve considerable benefits from mentoring, the organizations must state the desired outcome and ensure that they identify a key contact person who will coordinate and be responsible for follow through on establishing, supporting and maintaining the mentoring programmes.

References
Allen T.D, Eby LT, Poteet ML & Lima L (2004) Career Benefits Associated with Mentoring for Protégé. Journal of Applied Psychology 89 (3) Pp 129-136.
Baugh S.G & Scandura T.A (1999). The Effects of Multiple Mentors on the Protégé Attitudes towards the Work Setting.
Journal of Social Behaviour and Personality. Vol. 14 (4) Pp 516. Bird S.J & Didon C.J (1992) Retaining Women Science Students: A Mentoring Project of the Association of Women in Science. Initiatives Vol. 55 Pp7.
Bozionelos N (2004) Mentoring Provided: Relations to Career Success, Personality and Mentoring Received. Journal of Vocational Behaviour 4 (2) pp 24-46.
Burlew L.D (1991) Multiple Mentor Model. A Conceptual Framework. Journal of Career Development. Vol. 17 (3) pp 214-221.
Coley D.B (1996) Mentoring Two by Two. Journal of Training and Development. 50 P 47.
Gaskil L (1993) A Conceptual Framework for the Development of Formal Mentoring Programmes. Journal of Career Development 16(4) Pp 147-160.
Hymowitz C (1995) How a Dedicated Mentor gave Momentum to a Woman’s Career. Academy of Management Review 26 Pp 267-311.
Koonce R (1994) One on One Training. Journal of Training and Development. Vol. 47 Pp35.
Kram K.E (1983) Phases of the Mentor Relationship. Academy of Management Journal No 26 Pp 615
Kram K.E (1985) Mentoring at Work. Gklenview: Foresman publishers.
Mullen E.J & Noe R.A (1999) The Mentoring Information Exchange. Journal of Organizational Behaviour 20 (3) P 241
Noe R.A (1988) An Investigation of the Determinants of Successful Assigned Mentoring Relationship. Personnel Psychology 41 pp 459.
Ragins B.R & Scandura T.A (1999). Burden or Blessing: Expected Costs and Benefits of being a Mentor. Journal of Organizational Behaviour 20 Pp 497-507.
Ragins B.R & Verbos A.K (2007) Positive Relationship in Action: Relational MentorIng and Mentoring Scheme in the Workplace in Dutton J & Ragins B.R (eds) Exploring Positive Relationship at Work: Building a Theoretical and Research Foundation. New Jersey: Lawrence Eribaum
Ragins B.R (2002) Understanding Diversified Mentoring Relationships: Challenges and Strategies. Journal of Management 16(4). Pp 24.
Ragins & scandura T.A (1992) Mentorship and Career Mobility: An Empirical Investigation. Journal of Organizational Behaviour 13 p 171
Wanberg C.R, Muller J.K & Marchese M (2006) Mentors and Protégé Predictors and Outcomes of Mentoring in a Formal Mentoring Programme. Journal of Vocational Behaviour 69 (7) Pp 413.
Zelditch M (1990) Mentor Roles. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of the Western Association of Graduate Schools Tempe,